# AI-Driven-Drug-Screening-for-solving-Substance-Abuse-
  Opioid use disorder (OUD) crisis involves unregulated use of synthetic opioids due to their psychotropic properties and is a well-established factor for drug-related deaths in British Columbia. In Vancouver, the crisis continues to worsen affecting individuals, families and communities resulting in an alarming number of deaths and putting enormous burden to the public health care system and safety of the city. The BC Coroners report recommended creating alternative safer drugs as an immediate means of combating this public health emergency.
  
  The primarily target of opioids are the MOR, DOR and KOR protein receptors in the brain. When drugs or opioids are used, potential side-effects occur as the drug targets other critical proteins in the body. Safer alternatives to existing opioids can be developed by systematically unveiling its interaction with the opioid protein-protein interaction (PPI) network. This project addresses the OUD problem by screening and identifying known drugs (drug-repurposing) that can serve as a safer alternative to existing opioids by lowering side-effects and overdose risks. The central idea is to elucidate the complex effect of a drug by developing reliable machine learning models of the opioid receptors and their PPI network to predict the binding of a drug to various interacting proteins in the body. The most optimal ML model is developed by performing a thorough evaluation and tuning based on datasets available on chEMBL. Further, in this work an innovative drug screening technique has been devised by leveraging the system of ML models of MOR and its PPI network. The strategy has been validated by accurately characterizing existing Health Canada based opioids and their side effects. When applied to screen 11,915 drugs, a number of safer opioid substitutes were revealed and are also customized based on vulnerable heath conditions. The result of this project would provide clinicians with a variety of options, strategies, and flexibility to offer care to treat individuals with OUD. Therefore, the novel approach in this project aims to directly take a step towards the recommendation outlined in the BC coroners report.
